feat(blog): Unleash the power of Fragments with GraphQL Codegen (#794)
the-guild-org/the-guild-website: pages/blog/getting-the-best-out-of-your-graphql-client-by-using-relay-patterns-through-graphql-code-generator.mdx

import withArticle from '../../ui/blog/article'

export const meta = {
  title:

>     'Getting the best out of your GraphQL client by using Relay patterns through GraphQL Code Generator',

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    'Getting the best out of your current/existing GraphQL client by using Relay patterns with GraphQL Code Generator',
```

Author: @charlypoly wants a shorter title :D

>   author: 'arda',

Reviewer: is it?

  tags: ['graphql'],
  date: '2022-08-01',

>   description: 'TBA',

Reviewer: don't forget

  image:

>     '/blog-assets/getting-the-best-out-of-your-graphql-client-by-using-relay-patterns-through-graphql-code-generator/cover.jpg'

Reviewer: maybe an image related to colocation?

}

export default withArticle(meta)

# Getting the best out of your GraphQL client by using Relay patterns through GraphQL Code Generator

There is no doubt that Relay is the most advanced JavaScript GraphQL Client that is out there. However, at the same time, the learning curve and adoption is yet very sparse compared to other popular alternatives such as Apollo Client, Urql, or GraphQL Request.

> As a consequence, many people don’t even know about all the benefits and patterns used within (and so far being exclusive to ) the relay-compiler, the GraphQL Code Generator counter-part tailored for Relay applications.

Reviewer 2: @n1ru4l, regarding the discussion on the confusing use of "GraphQL Code Generator" here:

> I’m not sure we need to mention the relay compiler here, we can stick on Relay right? (since we mainly talk about Fragments)

Reviewer: I think I would skip that whole part around counter-part and write it as separate sentence later

The Guild gathered and worked on projects whose GraphQL client usage spans across all the available solutions today. In our opinion, the most important parts of Relay are the concepts of building and scaling applications. These patterns are actually applicable to any GraphQL Client, you just need the right code generation tool for the job.

> 

Reviewer: Now here needs to come an overview of these concepts and why they are beneficial

Reviewer: including diagrams, you can also copy these things from the first ever GraphQL talk or some the Relay website

> Fortunately, we are happy to announce that we now have an opinionated preset for bringing the Relay patterns to your existing project without having to switch over to the Relay eco-system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fortunately, we are happy to announce that we now have an opinionated preset for bringing the above Relay patterns to your existing projects, no matter what client library you are currently using, without having to switch over to the Relay eco-system.
```

> 

Reviewer: Now here I would talk about the present itself, link to it and how to install it (including taking some of the stuff from the end of the article).
Then I would go to show how it actually works with each of the benefits/patterns

Author: done!

## Describe component data needs via GraphQL fragments

> Instead of writing one big GraphQL Operation for our whole page and passing that down to the components, start with describing the component's data dependencies through a GraphQL fragment.

Reviewer 2: I would right after this paragraph:

”This way, you are making the data-dependency of your component colocated and explicit (in the same way that some would colocate the TypeScript definitions).”

```tsx
import { gql, useFragment, FragmentType } from '@gql'

const Avatar_UserFragment = gql(/* GraphQL */ `
  fragment Avatar_UserFragment on User {
    avatarUrl
  }
`)

type AvatarProps = {
  user: FragmentType<typeof Avatar_UserFragment>
}

export function Avatar(props: AvatarProps) {
  const user = useFragment(Avatar_UserFragment, props.user)
  return <CircleImage src={user.avatarUrl} />
}
```

> ## Compose fragments for UI components

Reviewer 2: I would move this section below the fragment masking one and keep a single section after about combining fragments at components or top-level.

## Compose all Query fragments into a single Query operation

Finally, we can spread all our fragments into a single GraphQL Query operation that fetches all the data on our route component. This allows us to efficiently fetch all the data required for the route in one server roundtrip.

```jsx
import { gql, useFragment, FragmentType } from '@gql'
import { UserProfileHeader } from './user-profile-header'
import { FriendList } from './friend-list'

const UserProfileRoute_Query = gql(/* GraphQL */ `
  query UserProfile_Query {
    ...UserProfileHeader_QueryFragment
    ...UserList_QueryFragment
  }
`)

export function UserProfileRoute_Query() {
  const { data, loading, error } = useQuery(UserProfile_Query)
  if (loading) return <Loading />
  if (error) return <Error />
  return (
    <>
      <FriendList query={data} />
      <UserProfileHeader query={data} />
    </>
  )
}
```

## Conclusion

This pattern allows you to re-use and scale your components to the maximum while having a clear and sane data dependency flow from the top route down to the ends of the UI component trees.

> You can start adopting this pattern within your GraphQL application with any GraphQL client that supports `TypedDocumentNode` through our new and battle-tested GraphQL Code Generator preset `[gql-tag-operations-preset](https://www.graphql-code-generator.com/plugins/presets/gql-tag-operations-preset)`.

Reviewer 2: let’s put a short list of the compatible frameworks here?
ex: Apollo client, Apollo Angular, URQL and Vue

Reviewer: yes and let's mention that we are working on react-query and graphql-request (and later go back and link to our PRs there)
